---
layout: council-member
member_name: Andrés Gallegos
member_title: Chairman
location: Chicago, Illinois
image: images/andres-gallegos.jpg
image_alt_text: Andrés Gallegos picture
order: 1
start_date: April 6, 2022
---
**Andrés J. Gallegos, Esq.** is the Chairman of the National Council on Disability. He is a partner with the law firm of Hughes Socol Piers Resnick & Dym, Ltd., in Chicago, Illinois, where he focuses his practice on disability rights and healthcare law. He directs the law firm’s national disability rights practice, which has as its primary emphasis ensuring accessible healthcare, civic access and accessible housing for all people with disabilities. He is a board member of the American Association on Health & Disability, a national nonprofit organization dedicated to ensuring health equity for children and adults with disabilities through policy, research, education and dissemination at the federal, state and community level; a board member of Disability Lead, a Chicago-based non-for profit whose mission is to increase civic engagement and diverse leadership in the Chicago region by developing and building a network of leaders with disabilities. Andrés is a past Chairman of the Board of Directors of Access Living of Metropolitan Chicago, Chicago’s Center for Independent Living, and is a two-term past-member of the Statewide Independent Living Council of Illinois, having been appointed by the governor. He has written numerous articles for national and state professional healthcare and legal organizations on matters relating to the application of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act to healthcare providers, and is a highly-sought out lecturer on accessible healthcare and disability rights. He graduated with Honors from the University of Southern Mississippi, with a B.S. in Business Administration, and he attained a Juris Doctorate from the St. Louis University School of Law. He is a veteran of the United States Air Force, serving honorably for 14 years.