---
layout: council-member
member_name: "David D'Arcangelo "
location: "Malden, Massachusetts "
image: images/david-darcangelo.jpg
image_alt_text: David D'Arcangelo Picture
order: 4
start_date: April 6, 2022
---
**David D’Arcangelo** is the Commissioner of the Massachusetts Commission for the Blind (MCB), one of 15 agencies within the Executive Office of Health and Human Services (EOHHS).  Legally blind from a young age, he has built successful careers in both the public and private sectors.  As Commissioner, David oversees the agency’s $34M budget to ensure the highest quality of vocational and social rehabilitation services are delivered to individuals with blindness.  He was recognized by the Council of State Governments as one of the 30 Leaders Impacting Disability Policy.  Previously, he was Director of the Massachusetts Office on Disability (MOD).  David also served three terms as a Malden City Councilor-At-Large and was one of very few elected officials in Massachusetts to openly serve as a person with a disability.  David’s extensive experience in government and public policy includes serving the administrations of four governors and as an aide in the Massachusetts State Legislature.  He also served on the national “Work Matters” Task Force, which designed a framework for states to use in workforce development for people with disabilities as Co-Chair the Transportation, Technology & Other employment Supports Subcommittee.  He has presented at the National ADA Symposium, the American Enterprise Institute, the National Governor’s Association State Learning Lab and numerous other conferences, meetings and events.  He has served on the Board of Directors for the Arc of Middlesex East; Resource Partnership; and Tailored for Success; as well as member and former Chair of the Massachusetts Commission for the Blind Rehabilitation Council; Braille Literacy Advisory Council, and as an Election Officer for the City of Boston.  David is a graduate of Suffolk University, where he has served as an adjunct faculty member in the Communications and Journalism Department.  David has a daughter who is on the Autism Spectrum.