---
layout: post
title: Fall 2021 Call for Peer Reviewers
date: 2021-10-22
tag: Newsletter
image_alt_text: NA
---
The National Council on Disability (NCD) is seeking qualified peer reviewers for three upcoming projects. Please review the specifics of each project below and if interested submit your interest with qualifications to the designated email within each individual description:

* With experience or training/education in one or more of the following topics for an upcoming cooperative agreement competition: climate change, environmental justice, disability. Reviewers must be able to provide brief written analysis and scoring of submitted proposals. NCD seeks individuals who are good writers, critical thinkers, and who will commit to completing the review in a professional and timely manner. The review period is planned for mid November and peer reviewers work at their own pace, independently, during a 7-day period. Interested persons should send a statement of interest with qualifications to [anicholas@ncd.gov](mailto:anicholas@ncd.gov) by November 2, 2021.
* With experience or training/education in one or more of the following topics for an upcoming cooperative agreement competition: tax laws and regulations governing 501(c)(3) tax exempt organizations and the classification of their employees for federal employment tax purposes. Reviewers must be able to provide brief written analysis and scoring of submitted proposals. NCD seeks individuals who are good writers, critical thinkers, and who will commit to completing the review in a professional and timely manner. The review period is planned for mid-November and peer reviewers work at their own pace, independently, during a 7-day period. Interested persons should send a statement of interest with qualifications to [keacobacci@ncd.gov](mailto:keacobacci@ncd.gov) by November 2, 2021.
* With experience or training/education in one or more of the following topics for an upcoming cooperative agreement competition: quantitative and qualitative research methods; cost-effectiveness research in health care (or more specifically oral healthcare) at the state level; Medicaid. Reviewers must be able to provide brief written analysis and scoring of submitted proposals. NCD seeks individuals who are good writers, critical thinkers, and who will commit to completing the review in a professional and timely manner. The review period is planned for late November/early December and peer reviewers work at their own pace, independently, during a 7-day period. Interested persons should send a statement of interest with qualifications to [asoliman@ncd.gov](mailto:asoliman@ncd.gov) no later than November 24, 2021.
