---
layout: post
title: November 19, 2020 - Teleconference Council Meeting
federal_register_notice: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/11/16/2020-25278/sunshine-act-meetings
meeting_year: 2020
date: 2020-11-19
minutes: meetings/2020/november-19-2020-teleconference-council-meeting/quarterly-minutes-nov2020.pdf
---
## Meeting Info:

National Council on Disability Business Meeting November 19, 2020 10am EST, 9am CST, 7am PST – 4pm EST, 3pm CST, 1pm PST CALL-IN NUMBER: 1-800-353-6461; Conference ID: 9807341 Conference Title: NCD Meeting; Host Name: Neil Romano NOTE: Please join the meeting 5-10 minutes prior to scheduled start time. When prompted, provide the confirmation code, conference title and host name. To assist with the flow of communication, please mute your phone line until you are called on to speak or until the floor is open for comments or discussion. CART: https://www.streamtext.net/player?event=NCD-QUARTERLY NOTE: For the benefit of those following the meeting via the CART stream, please remember to state your name every time before you speak. 

## Agenda:

10:00 am - 10:10 am Welcome and Call to Order, Chairman Neil Romano Council Member Roll Call by Chairman Romano Staff and Contractor Roll Call by Lisa Grubb, Executive Director 10:10 am – 10:35 am Member Introductions and New Council Members Get Acquainted 10:35 am – 11:15 am Chairman’s Report and Future Work of the Council, Chairman Neil Romano 11:15 am – 11:35 am Executive Committee Reports Governance, Billy Altom Financial, Andres Gallegos 11:35 am – 11:45 am Executive Director’s Report, Lisa Grubb 11:45 am – 1:00 pm Adjournment for Lunch NOTE: Conference Line and CART will disconnect 1:00 pm Return to Order and Introduction of Chair Catherine Lhamon, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights Chairman Neil Romano 1:05 pm – 1:30 pm Presentation by Chair Catherine Lhamon of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights regarding its latest report. 1:30 pm – 2:30 pm Successful Transitions from 14(c) Subminimum Wage Employment, Chairman Neil Romano • Tonya Milling, Executive Director, the ARC of Virginia • Dr. Helen Armstrong, Parent perspective on CIE • Jackie Armstrong, Consumer Perspective on CIE • Phyllis Ferguson, Consumer Perspective on CIE 2:30 pm – 3:30 pm Committee Reports Progress Report 2020, COVID-19, Chairman Neil Romano Accessible Medical Diagnostic Equipment, Billy Altom Disparate Treatment of Puerto Rico Residents in Federal Programs, Andres Gallegos IDD Medicaid Reimbursement, Examining Medicaid Reimbursement for Oral Healthcare of People with I/DD, Rabia Belt 3:30 pm – 4:00 pm Public Comment, Rabia Belt We are receiving comments today on 14 c and People with Disabilities during COVID. Each person will be given three minutes to present comment. If anyone is presenting as a group and prefer to choose a spokesperson, the group representative will be given six minutes to provide comment. To ensure your comments are accurately reflected and become part of the public record, NCD requests electronic submission prior to the meeting or immediately after to PublicComment@ncd.gov. 4:00 pm Adjournment, Chairman Romano